# Model Card: Black-Box Optimisation (BBO) Gaussian Process Regressor Model

The BBO is conducted for an educational capstone project run by Imperial College London towards the award of a Professional Certificate in Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence [August 2025 to March 2026].

The BBO task was maximisation of 8 independent BBO functions over the course of 13 available query submissions per BBO function. Notably, along with an initial dataset provided for each BBO function, successive query submissions had access to earlier submissions’ outputs. In this manner, the dataset to train the model expanded over time, allowing the model to be refined before each query submission. 

## Model Description

### Task:

To aid the optimisation of functions whose analytical form is unknown (i.e. “black-box” functions) that output a continuous, scalar value with and without the presence of noise. The model has been used to optimise functions whose inputs range from 2 \- 8 dimensions, with between 10 \- 53 data samples. The model is expected to work well up to 12 dimensions and hundreds of data samples. It may extend further, but it would need to be confirmed beforehand.

An example of a suitable task is hyperparameter tuning for a complex model where evaluations of the real model are monetarily costly and/or slow to generate, either of which would lead to a limited evaluation budget. As such, this model can be used as a surrogate to efficiently guide hyperparameter tuning.

### Input:

The model requires a training dataset whose samples comprise input feature values and corresponding outputs relating to an unknown "black-box" function. The input feature values should reside within the range [0, 1), and the output should be a single continuous numeric value.

### Output:

The model generates a list of suggested next evaluation points based upon acquisition functions and a variety of exploration/exploitation parameter values.    

### Model Architecture:

The model performs Bayesian Optimisation via a Gaussian Process (GP) surrogate. Multiple anisotropic kernels (e.g. Matern 1/2, Matern 3/2, Matern 5/2, RBF and Rational Quadratic), x transform, and y transform combinations are trialled to generate Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation (LOOCV) Standardised Mean Square Error (SMSE) scores. The model automatically selects the combination with the best (i.e. lowest) y-original space SMSE score to perform Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) and Expected Improvement (EI) acquisition function maximisation over, using a range of exploration/exploitation parameter values. This allows model users to methodically select black-box optimisation evaluation points in a principled manner. The model has been coded in Python employing common libraries such as _Numpy_, _Pandas_, _Scikit-learn_ and _SciPy_.

## Performance

### Results Summary

After all 13 available query submissions:

|  Function  | Initial Best |   BBO Best   | BBO Query | Improvement   (%) |
|:----------:|:------------:|:------------:|:---------:|:-----------------:|
| Function 1 | 7.710875e-16 | 7.249925e-10 | 13        | 94,021,979%         |
| Function 2 | 0.611205     | 0.676188     | 12        | 11%               |
| Function 3 | -0.034835    | -0.007748    | 10        | 78%               |
| Function 4 | -4.025542    |  0.702516    | 9         | 117%              |
| Function 5 | 1088.86      | 8662.41      | 7         | 696%              |
| Function 6 | -0.714265    | -0.146078    | 2         | 80%               |
| Function 7 | 1.364968     | 2.814679     | 12        | 106%              |
| Function 8 | 9.598482     | 9.999980     | 13        | 4%                |

_'Initial Best'_ provides the highest output value for each BBO function within its corresponding initial data samples. _'BBO Best'_ gives the highest output achieved over the 13 available query submissions, and _'BBO Query'_ gives the corresponding submission number for _'BBO Best'_ (submissions numbered 1 to 13 inclusive). _'Improvement'_ is the percentage improvement that _'BBO Best'_ achieves over _'Initial Best'_. All underlying outputs are the raw outputs generated by Imperial College London's BBO processing.  

## Limitations

**Categorical Data:** The model is not intended to optimise functions outputting categorical values without adaptation.

**Data Samples:** Whilst having more data samples in general is good, attempting to use a GP with thousands or tens of thousands of data points is likely to be prohibitively slow. This is because GPs involve matrix inversion, for which the computational complexity is O(N^3). Alternatives should be sought in this scenario.

**Kernel Parameter Bounds:** Currently, due to all 8 BBO functions having input features constrained to the range \[0, 1\] and submission queries being specified up to 6 d.p., White Kernel noise level bounds and kernel length scale bounds have been set to \[1e-7, 10\]. If a wider/tighter range is required, the Python code should be modified accordingly (see _gaussian\_process\_helper.LOWER\_BOUND_ and _gaussian\_process\_helper.UPPER\_BOUND_).

**Output Floor/Ceiling:** The GP model assumes outputs can assume both positive and negative values. Where underlying BBO functions have a known floor or ceiling, the model would need adaptation/extension to obey such a floor/ceiling. 

**Commercial Use:** It is not expected to be used in a commercial setting as it was developed for educational purposes only. Python source code has not been peer reviewed, and no warranty is provided as to its correctness.

## Trade-offs

By default, the model tests all combinations of configured i.) kernels, ii.) x input transforms, and iii.) y output transforms to provide maximal GP flexibility at the expense of added computational time. In particular, it does not exclude combinations known to have performed poorly in earlier submission rounds. However, as analytical LOOCV is utilised, the generation of LOOCV SMSE scores is not computationally excessive. (Should users wish to manually exclude certain kernels and/or transforms, there are appropriate Jupyter notebook cells to do so.)

Analytically LOOCV isn’t a pure win, however. Given that x and y transformations are employed, the transformers themselves are fitted using all the data. In particular, this includes the point that is “left out” for cross-validation, and hence, this is "data leakage". Overall, the performance boost given by analytical LOOCV only needing to fit the data once, rather than for every data sample, is well worth this trade-off.

For awareness, all Jupyter notebooks are expected to finish within 5-10 mins.

## Ethical Considerations

The underlying BBO functions are understood to be synthetic in nature, created expressly for the provision of an educational capstone project. As such, the model does not create or reinforce any biases against any population or demographic.
